[KB-223] Supervisor feedback (#141)
chhoumann/thesis-chemcam: report_thesis/src/sections/problem_definition.tex

\section{Problem Definition}\label{sec:problem_definition}
The primary objective of this research is to enhance computational methods for the accurate and robust quantification of chemical compositions using \gls{libs} data.

The input to such models consists of \gls{libs} spectral data, which includes intensity readings across a spectrum of wavelengths. This data is in the form of Clean, Calibrated Spectra\cite{andersonImprovedAccuracyQuantitative2017}, the output of level 1 processing as described by \citet{wiensPreflightCalibrationInitial2013}. The wavelength intensities are quantified in units of \\ photon/shot/mm\textsuperscript{2}/sr/nm.

Formally, we have:

> \newcounter{listitem}

Reviewer: I've made a suggestion to remove spectrometer matrix, use $n_o$ to denote oxide count, use $\lambda$ to denote wavelengths. Please see the commit with SHA `762791bfa9f4`. Feel free to reverse it if you disagree.

While I think the use of cardinality notation is clever, I believe it isn't standard notation, and therefore isn't preferable.
Please let me know your thoughts.

Cardinality notation (|o|) typically denotes the number of elements in a set. The index $o$ represents different oxides, but  $o$ itself is not a set; it's an index variable ranging over a set of oxides. So it might confuse readers who expect it to signify the size of a set, not the range of an indexing variable.

Author: Agree

While background elements are also present, our current analysis does not quantify these. 
Our goal is to construct a mapping function $\mathcal{F}: \mathbb{R}^N \rightarrow \mathbb{R}^{n_o}$, where $N$ represents the dimensionality of the processed \gls{libs} signals and $n_o$ denotes the number of target oxides in the Concentration Matrix $\mathbf{C}[\chi, o]$.
This function maps a processed \gls{libs} signal vector $\mathbf{x} \in \mathbb{R}^N$ to a vector $\mathbf{v} \in \mathbb{R}^{n_o}$ of estimated oxide concentrations. The vector $\mathbf{x}$ is derived from matrix $\mathbf{M}$, representing processed spectral data:
\[
\mathbf{v} = \mathcal{F}(\mathbf{x}).
\]

As previously introduced, quantifying chemical compositions from \gls{libs} spectral data poses significant challenges, including high dimensionality and multicollinearity of the data, as well as matrix effects. Here, we further examine these challenges:

\begin{itemize}
    \item \textbf{Data Dimensionality and Collinearity:} The high dimensionality of spectral data, coupled with multicollinearity—where multiple spectral features exhibit strong correlations—complicates the modeling and analysis. 

>     This challenge arises both in the Intensity Matrix $\mathbf{I[\chi, l, s, \lambda]}$ and consequently the Averaged Intensity Matrix $\mathbf{A[\chi, l, \lambda]}$, where the high number of wavelengths leads to a large number of dimensions, and the intensity readings across these wavelengths often display high correlations.

Reviewer: To be more precise, I would say it's more evident from $\lambda>\chi$ in all cases we know of. That is, there are more dimensions than samples.

Reviewer: And I think we might want to separate this kind of sentence into two sentences. First, we clarify the challenge of dimensionality and how it affects the data. Then we do the same for collinearity.

Author: ```suggestion
    \item \textbf{Data Dimensionality and Collinearity:} The high dimensionality of spectral data complicates the modeling and analysis. This issue is evident because there are more wavelengths ($\lambda$) than samples ($\chi$), leading to a greater number of dimensions than samples. Consequently, this arises both in the Intensity Matrix $\mathbf{I[\chi, l, s, \lambda]}$ and the Averaged Intensity Matrix $\mathbf{A[\chi, l, \lambda]}$. Additionally, multicollinearity, where multiple spectral features exhibit strong correlations, further complicates the analysis as the intensity readings across these wavelengths often display high correlations.
```
Something like that?

    For instance, emission lines from the same element can overlap, causing their intensity readings at different wavelengths to be interdependent\cite{andersonImprovedAccuracyQuantitative2017}. 

>     This interdependency complicates the extraction of independent spectral features necessary for accurate quantitative analysis.

Reviewer: > This interdependency complicates the extraction of independent spectral features necessary for accurate quantitative analysis.

What do you mean? Can you explain this to me? Not sure I understand.

Author: ```suggestion
    This interdependency makes it difficult to isolate and identify unique spectral features, which is crucial because accurate quantitative analysis relies on distinguishing individual contributions of each feature to correctly determine the composition of the sample
```

What do you think about this instead?

>     \item \textbf{Data Dimensionality and Collinearity:} The high dimensionality of spectral data, coupled with multicollinearity—where multiple spectral features exhibit strong correlations—complicates the modeling and analysis. 
>     This challenge arises both in the Intensity Matrix $\mathbf{I[\chi, l, s, \lambda]}$ and consequently the Averaged Intensity Matrix $\mathbf{A[\chi, l, \lambda]}$, where the high number of wavelengths leads to a large number of dimensions, and the intensity readings across these wavelengths often display high correlations.
>     For instance, emission lines from the same element can overlap, causing their intensity readings at different wavelengths to be interdependent\cite{andersonImprovedAccuracyQuantitative2017}. 
>     This interdependency complicates the extraction of independent spectral features necessary for accurate quantitative analysis.

Author: ```suggestion
    \item \textbf{Data Dimensionality and Collinearity:} The high dimensionality of spectral data and the multicollinearity within this data pose significant challenges for modeling and analysis.
The large number of dimensions leads to problems such as sparsity, ineffective distance metrics, overfitting, and increased computational complexity. 
This means that the captured data in the intensity matrix is made up of a significant amount of noise. This is mitigated to some extend by averaging the number of shots, producing the average intensity matrix, but the high number of wavelengths still present a challenge.
Similarly, due to the overlapping nature of emission lines from different elements, the intensity readings at different wavelengths are often highly correlated. 
This interdependency makes it difficult to extract independent spectral features necessary for accurate quantitative analysis\cite{andersonImprovedAccuracyQuantitative2017}.
```
Tried to address all three comments. What do you think?

>     \item \textbf{Matrix Effects:} As noted in the introduction, matrix effects refer to any effect that can cause variations in the intensity of emission lines of an element independent of the concentration of that element. 

Reviewer: ref to introduction

>     These effects are caused by the complex interplay of various physical processes within the plasma generated by the LIBS technique. The presence of different background elements can significantly alter the emission intensities by affecting these processes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    These effects are caused by the complex interplay of various physical processes within the plasma generated by the \gls{libs} technique. The presence of different background elements can significantly alter the emission intensities by affecting these processes.
```

>     This also affects both the Intensity Matrix $\mathbf{I[\chi, l, s, \lambda]}$ and the Averaged Intensity Matrix $\mathbf{A[\chi, l, \lambda]}$, where the recorded intensities are influenced by the interaction of multiple physical processes, such as the coupling process between the laser photons and the target, self-absorption of optical emission lines within the plasma or collisional interactions in the plasma.

Reviewer: This feels "off" to me. Not sure why, it just does. Something about it feeling slightly forced? to make this connection.
You can disregard if you don't agree.

I think, if we were to be more precise about what this implies, why, and why it matters for the exact data/matrix we're dealing with, it would make more sense to me.

>     \item \textbf{Matrix Effects:} As noted in the introduction~\ref{sec:introduction}, matrix effects refer to any effect that can cause variations in the intensity of emission lines of an element independent of the concentration of that element. 
>     These effects are caused by the complex interplay of various physical processes within the plasma generated by the \gls{libs} technique. The presence of different background elements can significantly alter the emission intensities by affecting these processes.
>     This also affects both the Intensity Matrix $\mathbf{I[\chi, l, s, \lambda]}$ and the Averaged Intensity Matrix $\mathbf{A[\chi, l, \lambda]}$, where the recorded intensities are influenced by the interaction of multiple physical processes, such as the coupling process between the laser photons and the target, self-absorption of optical emission lines within the plasma or collisional interactions in the plasma.

Author: ```suggestion
    \item \textbf{Matrix Effects:} As noted in the introduction, matrix effects refer to any effect that can cause variations in the intensity of emission lines of an element independent of its concentration. These effects arise from the complex interplay of various physical processes within the plasma generated by the \gls{libs} technique. The presence of different background elements can significantly alter emission intensities by affecting these processes. This impacts the accuracy of our previously discussed mapping function $\mathcal{F}$, which quantifies chemical compositions from processed \gls{libs} signals. Variations in recorded intensities due to matrix effects complicate the extraction of accurate and independent spectral features because the overlapping and interaction of emission lines can mask or distort the true signal of individual elements. This makes it difficult to isolate the contributions of each element to the overall spectrum. Consequently, it becomes challenging to precisely map the processed \gls{libs} signal vector $\mathbf{x} \in \mathbb{R}^N$ to a vector $\mathbf{v} \in \mathbb{R}^{n_o}$ of estimated oxide concentrations, thereby impacting the reliability of the predicted chemical compositions~\cite{cleggRecalibrationMarsScience2017, andersonImprovedAccuracyQuantitative2017}.
```
How about them apples?

>     \item \textbf{Matrix Effects:} As noted in the introduction~\ref{sec:introduction}, matrix effects refer to any effect that can cause variations in the intensity of emission lines of an element independent of the concentration of that element. 
>     These effects are caused by the complex interplay of various physical processes within the plasma generated by the \gls{libs} technique. The presence of different background elements can significantly alter the emission intensities by affecting these processes.
>     This also affects both the Intensity Matrix $\mathbf{I[\chi, l, s, \lambda]}$ and the Averaged Intensity Matrix $\mathbf{A[\chi, l, \lambda]}$, where the recorded intensities are influenced by the interaction of multiple physical processes, such as the coupling process between the laser photons and the target, self-absorption of optical emission lines within the plasma or collisional interactions in the plasma.

Author: ```suggestion
   \item \textbf{Matrix Effects:} As noted in the introduction~\ref{sec:introduction}, matrix effects refer to any effect that can cause variations in the intensity of emission lines of an element independent of its concentration. These effects arise from the complex interplay of various physical processes within the plasma generated by the \gls{libs} technique. The presence of different background elements can significantly alter emission intensities by affecting these processes. This impacts the accuracy of our previously discussed mapping function $\mathcal{F}$, which quantifies chemical compositions from processed \gls{libs} signals. Variations in recorded intensities due to matrix effects complicate the extraction of accurate and independent spectral features because the overlapping and interaction of emission lines can mask or distort the true signal of individual elements. This makes it difficult to isolate the contributions of each element to the overall spectrum. Consequently, it becomes challenging to precisely map the processed \gls{libs} signal vector $\mathbf{x} \in \mathbb{R}^N$ to a vector $\mathbf{v} \in \mathbb{R}^{n_o}$ of estimated oxide concentrations, thereby impacting the reliability of the predicted chemical compositions~\cite{cleggRecalibrationMarsScience2017, andersonImprovedAccuracyQuantitative2017}.
```

>     \item \textbf{Matrix Effects:} As noted in the introduction~\ref{sec:introduction}, matrix effects refer to any effect that can cause variations in the intensity of emission lines of an element independent of the concentration of that element. 
>     These effects are caused by the complex interplay of various physical processes within the plasma generated by the \gls{libs} technique. The presence of different background elements can significantly alter the emission intensities by affecting these processes.
>     This also affects both the Intensity Matrix $\mathbf{I[\chi, l, s, \lambda]}$ and the Averaged Intensity Matrix $\mathbf{A[\chi, l, \lambda]}$, where the recorded intensities are influenced by the interaction of multiple physical processes, such as the coupling process between the laser photons and the target, self-absorption of optical emission lines within the plasma or collisional interactions in the plasma.
>     Collectively, these interactions can cause variation in the recorded intensities, posing significant challenges in accurately quantifying elemental concentrations~\cite{cleggRecalibrationMarsScience2017, andersonImprovedAccuracyQuantitative2017}.

Author: ```suggestion
    \item \textbf{Matrix Effects:} As noted in the introduction~\ref{sec:introduction}, matrix effects refer to any effect that can cause variations in the intensity of emission lines of an element independent of its concentration. These effects arise from the complex interplay of various physical processes within the plasma generated by the \gls{libs} technique. The presence of different background elements can significantly alter emission intensities by affecting these processes. This impacts the accuracy of our previously discussed mapping function $\mathcal{F}$, which quantifies chemical compositions from processed \gls{libs} signals. Variations in recorded intensities due to matrix effects complicate the extraction of accurate and independent spectral features because the overlapping and interaction of emission lines can mask or distort the true signal of individual elements. This makes it difficult to isolate the contributions of each element to the overall spectrum. Consequently, it becomes challenging to precisely map the processed \gls{libs} signal vector $\mathbf{x} \in \mathbb{R}^N$ to a vector $\mathbf{v} \in \mathbb{R}^{n_o}$ of estimated oxide concentrations, thereby impacting the reliability of the predicted chemical compositions~\cite{cleggRecalibrationMarsScience2017, andersonImprovedAccuracyQuantitative2017}.
```

Author: How about this?

\section{Problem Definition}\label{sec:problem_definition}

> The primary objective of this research is to systematically evaluate existing computational methods to identify the best-performing techniques and subsequently develop an optimized machine learning pipeline for accurately and robustly quantifying the chemical compositions of Martian geological samples using LIBS spectral data.

Reviewer: Now that I return to this one, perhaps we've regressed slightly?
The objective contains action items, which may not be ideal.
Ideally, we'd talk about the problem throughout this section, and only at the end start defining _how_ we'd propose achieving it.
